you're watching the life cycle of a
streptomyces city color it's a strain of
bacteria that's found in the soil where
it lives in a community with other
organisms decomposing organic matter
city color is a beautiful organism a
powerhouse for synthesizing organic
chemical compounds it produces an
antibiotic called act ena herdin which
ranges in color from blue to pink and
purple depending on the acidity of its
environment that it produces this
pigment molecule sparked my curiosity
and led me to collaborate closely with
city column it is an unlikely
partnership but it's one that completely
transformed my practice as a materials
designer from it I understood how nature
was going to completely revolutionize
how we design and build our environments
and that organisms like seelye column
were going to help us grow our material
future so what's wrong with things as
they are well for the last century we've
organized ourselves around fossil fuels
arguably the most valuable material
system we have ever known
we are tethered to this resource and
we've crafted a dependency on it that
defines our identities cultures our ways
of making and our economies but our
fossil fuel based activities are
reshaping the earth with the kind of
violence that is capable of dramatically
changing the climate of accelerating a
loss of biodiversity and even sustaining
human conflict we're living in a world
where the denial of this dependence has
become deadly and its reasons are
multiple but they include the privilege
of not being affected and what I believe
is a profound lack of imagination about
how else we could live within the limits
of this planet's boundaries fossil fuels
will one day give way to renewable
energy that means we need to find new
material systems that are not
Trulli and based I believe that those
material systems will be biological but
what matters is how we design and build
them they mustn't perpetuate the
destructive legacies of the oil age when
you look at this image what do you see
well I see a highly sophisticated
biological system that through the use
of enzymes can move and place atoms more
quickly and precisely than anything
we've ever engineered and we know that
it can do this at scale Nature has
evolved over 3.8 billion years to be
able to do this but now through the use
of synthetic biology an emerging
scientific discipline that seeks to
customize this functionality of living
systems we can now rapid prototype the
assembly of DNA that means that we can
engineer the kind of biological
precision that makes it possible to
design a bacteria that can recycle metal
to grow fungi into furniture and even
sequester renewable energy from algae to
think about how we might access this
inherent brilliance of nature to build
things from living things let's consider
the biological process of fermentation
I've come to think of fermentation when
harnessed by humans as an advanced
technological toolkit for our survival
when a solid or liquid ferments it's
chemically broken down by bacterial
fungi the byproduct of this is what we
value so for example we add yeast to
grapes to make wine well in nature these
transformations are part of a complex
network a continuous cycle that
redistributes energy fermentation gives
rise to multi species interactions of
bacteria and fungi plants insects
animals and humans
in other words whole ecosystems we've
known about these powerful microbial
interactions for thousands of years you
can see how through the fermentation of
grains vegetal matter and animal
products all peoples and cultures of the
world
have domesticated microorganisms to make
the inedible edible and there's even
evidence that as early as 350 AD people
deliberately fermented food stuffs that
contained antibiotics the skeletal
remains of some Sudanese nubium were
found to contain significant deposits of
tetracycline that's an antibiotic that
we use in modern medicine today and
nearly 1,500 years later Alexander
Fleming discovered the antimicrobial
properties of mold and it was only
through the industrialized fermentation
of penicillin that millions could
survive infectious diseases fermentation
could once again play an important role
in our human development could it
represent a new mode of survival if we
harness it to completely change our
industries I've worked my creative
career to develop new material systems
for the textile industry and while it is
work that I love I cannot reconcile with
the fact that the textile industry is
one of the most polluting in the world
most of the ecological harm caused by
textile processing occurs at the
finishing and the dyeing stage
processing textiles requires huge
amounts of water and since the oil age
completely transformed the textile
industry many of the materials and the
chemicals used to process them are
petroleum based and so coupled with our
insatiable appetite for fast fashion a
huge amount of textile waste is ending
up in landfill every year because it
remains notoriously difficult to recycle
so again
contrast this with biology evolved over
3.8 billion years to rapid prototype to
recycle and to replenish better than any
system we've ever engineered I was
inspired by this immense potential and
wanted to explore it there assuming
Lee's simple question at the time if a
bacteria produces a pigment how do we
work with it to dye textiles while one
of my favorite way
is to grow streptomyces city color
directly onto silk you can see how each
colony produces pigment around its own
territory now if you add many many cells
they generate enough dye stuff to
saturate the entire cloth now the
magical thing about dyeing textiles in
this way the sort of direct fermentation
when you add the bacteria directly onto
the silk is that to dye one t-shirt the
bacteria survive on just 200 milliliters
of water and you can see how this
process generates very little runoff and
produces a color faster pigment without
the use of any chemicals so now you're
thinking and you're thinking right an
inherent problem associated with
designing with a living system is how do
you guide medium that has a life force
of its own well once you've established
the baseline for cultivating
streptomyces so that it consistently
produces enough pigment you can turn to
twisting folding clamping dipping
spraying submerging all of these begin
to inform the aesthetics of seedy colors
activity and using them in a systematic
way enables us to be able to generate an
organic pattern a uniform dye and even a
graphic print another problem is hard to
scale these artisanal methods of making
so that we can start to use them in
industry when we talk about scale we
consider two things in parallel scaling
the biology and then scaling the tools
in the processes required to work with
the biology if we can do this then we
can move what happens on a petri dish so
that it can meet the human scale
and then hopefully the architecture of
our environments
if Flemming were alive today this would
definitely be a part of his toolkit
you're looking at our current best guess
of how to scale biology it's a
bioreactor a kind of microorganism
brewery that contains yeasts that have
been engineered to produce specific
commodity chemicals and compounds like
fragrances and flavors it's actually
connected to a suite of automated
hardware and software that read in
real-time and feedback to a design team
the growth conditions of a microbe so we
can use the system to model the growth
characteristics of an organism like city
column to see how it would ferment at
50,000 litres I'm currently based at
ginkgo Bioworks
which is a biotechnology start-up in
Boston I am working to see how their
platform for scaling biology interfaces
with my artisanal methods of designing
with bacteria for textiles we're doing
things like engineering streptomyces
City column to see if it can produce
more pigment and we're even looking at
the tools for synthetic biology tools
that have been designed specifically to
automate synthetic biology to see how
they could adapt to become tools to
print and dye textiles
I'm also leveraging digital fabrication
because the tools that I need to work
with streptomyces City College don't
actually exist so in this case in the
last week actually I've just designed
the petri dish that is engineered to
produce a bespoke print on a whole
garment we're making lots of kimonos
here's the exciting thing I'm not alone
there are others who are building
capacity in this field like micro works
micro works is a startup that wants to
replace animal leather with mushroom
leather a versatile high-performance
material that has applications beyond
textiles and empty product in
architecture
and both threads they've engineered a
yeast to produce spider silk protein
that can be spun into a highly
programmable yarn so think water
resistance stretch ability and super
strength to reach economies of scale
these kinds of startups are having to
build and design and engineer the
infrastructure to work with biology for
example both threads have had to engage
in some extreme biomimicry to be able to
spin the product this yeast creates into
a yawn they've engineered a yarn making
machine that mimics the physiological
conditions under which spiders
ordinarily spin their own silk so you
can start to see how imaginative and
inspiring words of making exist in
nature that we can use to build capacity
around new bio-based industries what we
now have is the technology to design
build test and scale these capabilities
at this present moment as we face the
ecological crisis in front of us what we
have to do is to determine how we're
going to build these new material
systems so that they don't mirror the
damaging legacies of the oil age how
we're going to distribute them to ensure
a sustainable development that is fair
and equitable across the world and
crucially how we would like the
regulatory and ethical frameworks that
govern these technologies to interact
with our society biotechnology is going
to touch every part of our lived
experience it is living it is digital it
is designed and it can be crafted this
is a material future that we must be
bold enough to shape thank you
[Music]
[Applause]